---
title: Hello World!
date: 2025-01-01
description: New year, new blog and new obsessions; all in one place.
wordcount: process-anyway
---

# Hello World

After hours on end of reckless consideration and rewriting, I have finally
crafted my static site generator---a basic (but extremely inelegant) Bash
script---and my blog is now fully live. Not that I needed to tell you; after
all, you're already here.

I will spare you the technical details, mostly because the code itself is
agonizing to look at, but this struck me as a more streamlined way to manage my
blog. Using Pandoc and jq for core functionality (plus sassc for styling), I
have effectively put together an extremely portable and simple static site
generator. Heavy emphasis on simple, however, as it lacks any customizability I
didn not need personally. Sure, it is slow---relying on Bash and a Haskell
program will do that---but it is also exactly how I wanted it. Not slow, mind
you. Just, very simple and straightforward.

The script, unlike most of my projects, does not have one of my signature code
names I associate with _beloved_ projects. Still, it excels at being compact:
roughly 240 lines of code handle all functionality, fitting neatly into just a
few screenfuls of text. For what it's worth, it does its job and it does it well
enough above my expectations. Quite satisfied with how it turned out.

## What's Next

Onto more exciting news: I plan to write more frequently now. All of my previous
writeups have been archived (though still accessible) until I have a chance to
review or rewrite them. The old blog was more of a renderer for my personal
notes, but this time around, I am aiming for more in-depth posts. After almost
two years, the groundwork is finally complete and it is about time I focused on
actual writing instead of over-engineering the technical side of things.

If you feel inclined to reach out, let me know if there are any topics you would
like me to explore. My primary focus will be on Nix and Linux, but I might delve
into technical writeups about the languages I work with, as I work with them.

Happy new year, and all the best!
